Exam 3
Charlie Barajas japy (*******)




Question 1




Around 475mya, we would see the first terrestrial, non-vascular organisms called bryophytes, whilst the more developed, multicelullar mosses evolved around 450mya. These were and still are non-vascular, moist-dependent small organisms that rely on spores for reproduction. In mosses, the alternation of generations is when the haploid gametophyte stage alternates with the diploid sporophyte stage. . In Gametophytes are haploid cells where there are, fundamentally, archegonia and antheridia structures. The archegonia are the female ovary or egg carriers and the antheridia are the sperm carriers. The gametes from each combine to make the appropriate zygote and then embryo, which then turns into a sporophyte. The sporophyte has a foot or rhizoid and a seta that contains a capsule. This capsule releases a spherical casing full of spores, starting the cycle. After a germination event, a root structure called a protonema emerges and begins to colonize the surrounding substrate: not too different from a mycelial hyphae network. In mosses, the phyllids are the gametophyte leaf-like structures that help form the gametophyte moss structure . The phyllis helped generate the first pseudo leaves in a non-vascular plant, before the development of complex parenchymal vascular structures seen in broadleaf plants. The prothallus however is more associated with ferns, as that leaf type is contiguous with the cotyledons of angiosperms but more on a minute scale.




Now we get into ferns, which are generally in the monilophytes group of ferns and are within the pteridophyta phylum. The prothallus from these ferns produces both archegonia and antheridia, where a small protrusion or extension contains the fertilized egg from which a sperm had impregnated, forming a true sporophyte with roots, leaves, and stems. As the leaves mature, they form sori, spots under leaves that develop the sporangia that then houses the spore material. Propiopsida and archaeopteris forms are known for their larger fronds, whilst liverworts and club mosses are known for their tiny, bushy appearance that covers rock crevices and slits. Equisetopsida or horsetails don’t even resemble traditional ferns but still possess the basic xylem and phloem tracheids as common house ferns. Ferns also had a complex root system unlike the moss rhizoids, as the vascularization with both meristele and parenchymal tissue increased water solute and nutrient motility in the plant. Comparing ferns and mosses, we generally find that true ferns came after lycophytes and the earlier bryophytes, but lycophytes had some superior ability to retain moisture, and also possessed a somewhat more developed leafing body than pure mosses. 




Mosses and their adaptations mean that they cannot take dry environments, nor can they last for more than a year, as their simple structures and root systems do not support non-aquatic or dry ecosystems. Ferns however can last much longer due to their intricate and complex, angiosperm-like root systems that can maintain transpiration. These roots can also extract nutrients from the soil, greatly increasing the plant's overall size. Some ferns have then become gigantic, as the first progymnophytes grew into large trees, and pteridophytes as a plant group became the first to occupy land 300 million years ago. 




There are also major limitations for both mosses and ferns, despite their incredible adaptation and evolutionary paths towards reproduction. Since mosses need water for sperm motility and also for nutrient absorption, mosses are restricted to moist habitats, and so the need for precipitation for fertilization drastically hinders their success in an ecosystem. Ferns do have similar issues, but their resilience is higher for desiccation when compared to the non-vascular mosses. However, don’t mistake their need for moisture, as excessive heat and dryness will kill most ferns, but their terrestrial and arboreal strategies using seed dispersal supersedes mosses, and so their ability to dominate increases thereof. Rainforest ecosystems are the best habitations for mosses and ferns, although mosses have also been seen in boreal and colder regions worldwide, and can survive briefly anywhere as long as there is sufficient moisture. Maidenhair ferns are known to be difficult households, and that is because of their high surface area-to-volume ratio and the need for high humidity. Clubmosses are one type of moss that also likes lots of moisture and higher humidity, while also attaching to some type of substrate that provides some amount of mineral content like rocks.




Question 2




In gymnosperms, the seed is exposed or unprotected from the outside, much unlike angiosperms. The cones we call seeds in pines have what we describe as ovuliferous scales and or special structures that contain the male or female gametophyte. In females, sexual dimorphism means much larger cones that contain the megagametophyte, surrounded by integument and containing a micropyle that allows for the male pollen to enter. The haploid stage of conifer is puny compared to their sporophyte selves, as the gametophyte tissue is only really in the seedling or germination phase where the taproot forms and the protective seed embryo feeds the seedling. The microspores and or pollen goes into the pollen tube, where fertilization of the ovary structure produces what we call a diploid zygote. Conifers, in the geological scale, have many groups, such as pines, spruces, firs, taxodiums, junipers, and even sequoiadendron or redwoods. All these groups have cones, with some falling early and others remaining on the tree. Pines in particular developed cones, hardy bark, and thick resin to ward off early insects during the Carboniferous and later periods, as angiosperm-based pollination was not evolved enough to support the flowering species we know today.




Anthophyta, or the complex, flowering plants we recognize today, generally have seeds that are actually enclosed and also produce the intricate flowering designs we associate with angiosperms. Also, anthophyta generally has two cotyledon leaves, which are called dicots or monocots if only one leaf emerges. The male system consists of the stamen, and the female system has the pistil. The anther and filament make up rods where the pollen would contact a bee, which then touches the stigma and style where the pollination phase would occur. Bees, bats, hornets, beetles, moths, and other organisms can act as agents of pollination,a process that then produces the fertilized endosperm. Coconuts have an incredibly dense endosperm full of saturated fats and minerals that nourish the sapling, whilst some may not rely on their endosperm for long before roots need to extract outside nutrients. Animals like bears, deer, cows, elephants, and extinct megafauna have been able to disperse large endosperm fruits, particularly drupes and stone fruits with large seeds.




Adaptations by both gymno and angiosperms are based on evolutionary climate and even daily weather phenomena, as well as predatory pressures as well. Pines have bundles of leaves called fascicles with hardened cuticles or waxy coatings for reduced evapotranspiration. Xylem in conifers is made of tracheids, whilst angiosperms have a more developed xylem with sieve cell elements and companion cells for improved movement of fluids. Conifers have what is also called a perineum and cambium, which are both layers inside trunks that surround the innermost xylem and have several functions.. Pollen grains in gymnosperms have an exine, a durable layer that protects the grain from degradation after descinence, or when the pines dessicate and release all their microspores. Angiosperms have a stronger relationship with pollinators than gymnosperms, as cones need wind and vertical updraft to move pollen towards the female ovules. Angiosperms, such as yucca plants, require bats for pollination and would go extinct without them. Angiosperms have broad leaves and vesicle elements that provide better movement of water and solutes to tissues, although this can vary by species and genera. Eudicots have cotyledons and leaves with complex, vascular structures often seen in many angiosperms. These are just some of the adaptations that both groups have, each having their pros and cons depending on climate and predators.




Question 3




Referring to the transportation of water, the flow of water molecules from the roots all the way into the vascular leaf tissue where it will undergo transpiration is how water from roots to leaves or cradle to sink. There are many forces that trigger vertical or upward movement, as gravity will eventually restrict total, maximum height in tree species. Capillary action is the movement of water against gravity by a combination of cohesion and adhesion to cell tissue, such as electrostatic adhesion of water molecules to the cell tissue. The xylem connects to the root system where water is brought up through this special tissue which encompasses the majority of woody matter. Rhizomes or the root hairs within the rhizosphere are incredibly small, and are able to bypass the soil junctions between soil grains, absorbing moisture and moving through the plant using either apoplast or symplast pathways. Symplast means transferring water through channels called plasmodesmata, structures that move water across cells in a network. Apoplast means being able for water molecules to skid or circulate through the cell wall, but not inside the cytoplasm or organelles as with symplast. Transmembrane is basically when all cells become water transporter nodes, moving water in and out through aquaporins that facilitate orthogonal movement in all directions. This type of pathway would likely be best for softer, lower-ground tissues that need good distribution of moisture. In order for solutes to be filtered when needed, the endodermis of a root is equipped with a polymer-like material called a Casparian strip.




Water has a property called cohesion that allows hydrogen and oxygen bonds in water to stick together through electrostatic dipole phenomena. Adhesion means the attractions towards, in this context, the xylem borders or vessels of cells. When water evaporates through stoma or stomatal crypts, the negative pressure causes water to seep upward. Dehydrated plants do not open stomata, so this pressure declines, but moist or soggy environments with high canopy evaporation will surely optimize these conditions. Typical leaves are wide, palate, renalate, cardioid, or even circular, with high surface area for CO2 and light absorption. In arid conditions though, heat and drought stress often promotes succulent leaves and sunken stomata. In the case of the Bigpod Ceanothus, the leaf is covered with a thick cuticle that envelops the pores and other tissue, reducing water loss as a waxy sealant. The leaves have a trichome hair endowment, which basically blocks infrared heat and also captures water vapor from transpiration during CO2 intake. As a result of arid dryness, sunken stomata have also evolved to be able to minimize pore size and optimize water use in plants. The plant cell walls and root pressure help water move along the cell structure and plant. In cacti, thicker cuticles reduce water loss, whilst low-lying plants take advantage of capillary action.




Overall, stomata in plants and succulents are designed to release water when necessary for absorption of CO2. However, small plants with optimal conditions can cause guttation, a process of dew condensation from excess water pressure from soil conditions. However, extremely tall trees, or those 100+ feet tall, commonly experience embolisms, regions of tracheid columns that have vast amounts of air bubbles or water vapor, causing difficulty in transpiration and vertical movement. Cavitations are similar but are caused by incredibly low pressures, as well as rapid water movement that induces low pressure conditions. This is similar to how propellers accelerate water and induce evaporation through this special kind of stress. Larger trees have to repair these xylem defects through some actual regeneration mechanism or by using bordering pits to let the transpiration stream move upward unthwarted by any said issues. Small plants don’t have this because of various physical phenomena relating to turgor pressure, moisture stability from osmotic upward pressures, and other complex physics relating to water movement. Cavitation is also found in plasmas and goes beyond biology, but in this context, cavitation can also occur when water passes through a membrane far too quickly, inducing velocity and frictional stresses that result in cavitation and thus vaporization.












Question 4




Since cells with chloroplast produce energy through photosynthesis, many differing cellular regions of a plant can produce energy, as long as it has a chloroplast, some transport mechanism, and is able to conduct light or photons effectively through itself or surrounding cells. Plants have a palisade mesophyll that contains the actual chlorophyll and chloroplasts content. The xylem is mostly for water and minerals, but the phloem is what encapsulates the basic and oligosaccaride sugars that the plant needs. Trees often have a thinner phloem ring that supplies sugars to leaves and branches for apical growth and thickening of the trunk. In smaller plants, the fleshy matrix that makes up the inside is called parenchymal tissue, sort of like a puffy, lightweight complex of cells that maintain plant integrity. When needed, the plant will store glucose as amylose or other starches in specialized organelles similar to vacuoles. Vascular bundles are basically like the transportation centers where most vascular tissue is located, acting as a hub for solute transport in cells. The parenchymal cells and even the meristems cells both can use and store excess sucrose, whether for a spike in growth conditions and or unfavorable weather. Even though lots of tissues in plants are naturally photosynthetic due to their green chlorophyll, the mesophyll layer and dark leaves often have the highest, and so the plant can use special tubers for energy storage or through stems. 




Whenever food is moved along plant tissue, special cellular structures that perform the functions of sucrose movement. Sieve cells do not have an apparent nucleus, but do have a companion cells that help with active transport through ATP and regulated solute balancing to maintain solute flow. Sieve elements are like tubes that don't have any mechanical parts but the sieve plates, borders that both connect and act as membranes for sucrose solute. Companion plants having a nucleus also means being able to develop the necessary proteins for building the sieve elements. The actual channels in this case are plasmodesmata, a symplast method of direct ion and cytoplasmic exchange between these cell types. The balance of turgor pressure and water is indeed caused by the flow of sucrose and the following of said water into the phloem where it helps maintain adequate turgor pressure. In the vascular tissue that moves this solute, there are bundle sheath cells, a wrapping around the vascular bundles that specializes in photosynthesis and production. This is usually for C4/C3 production, and the relations of these cells spatially helps increase efficiency and carbon fixation processes. When sugars are needed, companion cells will undergo phloem loading, a process of moving sucrose into the sieve cell elements where movement will occur. This means that the stoma can close when CO2 is not needed. Trees often have a xylem and phloem layers with their respective tracheids and sieve cells, but they are often connected due to the need for water balance, and so the parenchymal tissue can help with both systems in indirect ways like storage of water in vacuoles.




Now we get to the use of biomolecules and nitrogen carriers as food sources. In humans, nitrate and ammonia are poisonous, but plants use these for various biosynthetic pathways, including amino acids, proteins, polymers, alkaloids, and other complex compounds that need nitrogen. Acids like glutamine are used in abundance for growth and for energetic processes, as well as the synthesis of nucleic acids. The legumes have a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixers in the soil, allowing for efficient ammonification and increased foliage production, as nitrogen often promotes green leaves. Potassium and phosphate are other vital nutrients that are used for biomolecule synthesis. In order to regulate PH in plant tissues, organic substances like citrate and malate are transported for both energy and regulation. Apical meristems, seeds, fruits, and roots all need these organic molecules for cell division, energy, PH regulation, energy storage, and cell maintenance. Cells that need succinate or other organic acids would require a developed companion cell system for some level of PH maintenance on these compounds and a developed xylem system that can bring up water that contains the organic and inorganic solutes needed for biosynthesis of molecules. 




The phloem relies on the pressure flow hypothesis for the transportation of sugars from the areas of photosynthesis to the root zone. This is colloquially called the pressure flow hypothesis, suggesting that the source of pressurized flow begins in the leaves and flows downward all the way into roots and surrounding organs if present. This would even include the soil as nitrogen-fixers and beneficial mycorrhizae often demand sucrose for their actual benefits. The palisade mesophyll helps produce the sugars that are then actively transported into the sieve elements under a sucrose symporter mechanism. This ensures that sucrose enters the sieve cells and is why phloem loading is more efficient than just passive movement of solute. These symporters are technically called proton-sucrose symporters because a proton is used to direct the flow current into the sieve cells. These sugars then flow downward, likely due to both orthostatic and gravitational forces and are dependent upon the amount of photosynthesis and other comorbidities associated with the pressure flow hypothesis. As the sugar levels increase in the sieve cells, it creates an osmotic induction effect that causes water from neighboring cells to enter via aquaporins, increasing the internal static pressure. 




As the plasmodesmata help with solute movement, plants may also use a method called polymer trapping or oligosaccharide-aided transport where disaccharides are converted into substances like raffinose and other large sugars. As these sugars reach the roots, they are used for cell division and root expansion, particularly the taproot if one is present. Research has also proven that the phloem system is indeed complex, but phloem unloading generally uses either apoplastic or symplastic pathways depending on distance and type of tissue. Once in the roots, most of the phloem unloading happens for storing starches, and or for growing a larger root system overall. Nitrogen carriers in this case may also be moved to the root system and or brought up, as these substances should easily bypass the casparian strip. Most solutes, except large proteins and or very large acids, can easily integrate into phloem loading to some degree since sucrose and the flow hypothesis supports the planar movement within said phloem tissue.




References




Friesen, Larry Jon and Robert J. Cummings. 2024. Principles of Biology. NatureJournal.




Contributors: Michael, Knoblauch. L. Daniel, Mullendore. “Testing Munch hypothesis of long distance phloem transport in plants”. Doe Pages, U.S Department of Energy. Jun 02, 2016. Vol 5, https://www.osti.gov/pages/biblio/1261693 




Holtta, Teemu. Kurppa, Miika. Nikinmae. “Scaling of xylen and phloem transport capacity and resource usage with tree size.” Frontiers, Dec 04, 2013.  https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/plant-science/articles/10.3389/fpls.2013.00496/full 




Michaels, Tom. Clark, Matt. Hoover, Emily. “The Science of Plants” Libraries. The University of Minnesota. Creative Commons International License https://open.lib.umn.edu/horticulture/chapter/5-1-inside-leaves/ 




Knee. Michael. “Anthophyta Evolution and Diversity” plantfacts.osu. The Ohio State University https://plantfacts.osu.edu/resources/hcs300/angio1.htm